# Troubleshooting RetroArch

## Essential information

When problems arise during the operation of RetroArch, it can be helpful for the developers and other volunteers to have certain standard information in order to find a solution. When requesting help with a Lakka issue, please try to include:

1. A description of the problem
2. The hardware that you are using
3. RetroArch log files recorded when the problem occurs (if possible) along with any other logs that are relevant
4. The name of the libretro core used and its version
5. The version of RetroArch you are using

## Creating RetroArch log files

The specific process of creating a log file varies from platform to platform.

### Log files in Lakka
[Please see the Troubleshooting Lakka doc].(http://www.lakka.tv/doc/Troubleshooting-Lakka/)

### Log files in Linux

#### RetroArch log in Linux
Start the retroarch service in 'verbose' mode with this command: `retroarch --menu --verbose >> RA-log.txt 2>&1`. The file RA-log.txt is now stored in the home directory.

#### Graphic card logs

`lspci -nnk | grep -A 3 VGA` will give information about your graphic card.

#### Audio device logs

`aplay -L` enumerates audio devices which have been detected by Lakka.

#### Input device logs

`lsusb` lists all devices attached via USB

`dmesg` displays all messages from the kernel ring buffer which typically is holding the messages generated by Lakka's Linux kernel from the boot process. The dmesg log lists each hardware device that the kernel detected along with information on how the device was configured by the system.

### Log files in Windows

1. Open a console window with the `cmd` command. 
2. Navigate to the RetroArch folder
3. Launch RetroArch with this commandline: `retroarch_debug --menu --verbose > RA-log.txt`

### Log files in OS X

To be written

### Log files in Android

To be written
